==================
smtp-url-analysis
==================

Overview
--------

The `smtp-url-analysis` package is a Zeek network security monitor suite designed for comprehensive SMTP and phishing analysis. It extracts URLs from email bodies, tracks subsequent clicks in HTTP traffic, and matches various email fields against malicious indicators. This package operates effectively in both cluster and standalone modes.

Features
--------

URL Extraction and Logging
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `log-smtp-urls.zeek` script extracts URLs from email MIME bodies using regular expressions. All extracted links are recorded in `smtpurl_links.log`. This log includes fields such as timestamp, connection ID (uid and id), host, and the full URL.

Clicked URL Tracking
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This functionality, provided by `smtp-url-clicks.zeek` and `log-clicked-urls.zeek`, monitors HTTP traffic for URLs previously seen in SMTP traffic. When a match occurs, it indicates a user clicked a link from an email. These events are logged to `smtp_clicked_urls.log`. The system uses bloom filters for efficient lookup of expired URLs and supports tracking referrer chains to provide context on the click path.

Sensitive URI Detection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `smtp-sensitive-uris.zeek` script identifies suspicious patterns in extracted URLs. It generates several notice types under the `SMTPurl` namespace:

* `SensitiveURI`: The URL matches suspicious text patterns.
* `DottedURL`: The URL contains an embedded IP address instead of a domain name.
* `WatchedFileType`: The URL points to a suspicious file extension.
* `BogusSiteURL`: The domain contains your organization's domain as a substring but is not an authorized subdomain, helping detect typosquatting or impersonation.
* `Suspicious_File_URL`: A suspicious file URL was detected.
* `Suspicious_Embedded_Text`: Suspicious text was found embedded in the URL.

Malicious Indicator Matching
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `smtp-malicious-indicators.zeek` script reads indicators from a tab-separated feed file using the Zeek Input Framework. It supports live updates without requiring a Zeek restart. The script matches indicators against various SMTP fields, including mailfrom, from, to, rcptto, reply_to, subject, relay IPs (path), attachments, and URLs.

File Download Detection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `smtp-file-download.zeek` script detects when a URL from an email is clicked and results in a file download of a watched MIME type. This generates an `SMTPurl::FileDownload` notice.

HTTP Sensitive POST Detection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `http-sensitive_POSTs.zeek` script detects HTTP POST requests containing potential credentials, specifically when the request originates from a clicked phishing URL. This script uses the `SMTP` namespace.

* `SMTP::SensitivePOST`: Detected a POST request containing password or credential data.
* `SMTP::SensitivePasswd`: Detected credentials that match the site domain and meet specific password complexity requirements.

SMTP Threshold Monitoring
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `smtp-thresholds.zeek` script tracks sender activity, including recipient counts, subjects, and origins. It helps identify targeted attacks or mass mailing events. It supports whitelisting bulk senders via a feed file.

RFC 2047 Subject Decoding
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `smtp-decode-rfc2047.zeek` script decodes email subjects that use RFC 2047 encoding, ensuring that analysis and matching work on the intended text.

Installation
------------

Install the package using the Zeek package manager:

.. code-block:: bash

    zkg install smtp-url-analysis

Configuration
-------------

All configuration settings are located in `scripts/configure-variables-in-this-file.zeek`. You should review and modify these variables to suit your environment.

Key variables include:

* `site_domain`: Your organization's primary domain pattern. This is a critical setting for detecting impersonation.
* `site_sub_domains`: Patterns representing your legitimate subdomains.
* `suspicious_file_types`: File extensions that should trigger a notice.
* `suspicious_text_in_url`: Text patterns to flag within URLs.
* `ignore_file_types`, `ignore_fp_links`, `ignore_site_links`: Used to suppress false positives.
* `ignore_mail_originators`: Subnets to exclude from analysis, such as your internal mail relays.
* `ignore_mailfroms`: Specific sender addresses or patterns to ignore.
* `smtp_indicator_feed`: The file path for the malicious indicator feed.
* `watch_mime_types`: MIME types to monitor for file downloads.
* `batch_notice_email`: The email address for receiving notifications.

Notices Reference
-----------------

The following table lists the notice types generated by this package.

+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Notice Type                         | Description                                             |
+=====================================+=========================================================+
| `SMTPurl::SensitiveURI`             | URL matches suspicious text patterns                    |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::DottedURL`                | URL contains an IP address instead of a domain name     |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::WatchedFileType`          | URL contains a suspicious file extension                |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::BogusSiteURL`             | Potential typosquatting or impersonation detected       |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Suspicious_File_URL`      | Suspicious file URL detected                            |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Suspicious_Embedded_Text` | Suspicious embedded text detected                       |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Malicious_MD5`            | Attachment MD5 matches a malicious indicator            |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Malicious_Attachment`     | Attachment name matches a malicious indicator           |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Malicious_Indicator`      | General malicious indicator match                       |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Malicious_Mailfrom`       | Mailfrom field matches a malicious indicator            |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Malicious_Mailto`         | Mailto field matches a malicious indicator              |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Malicious_from`           | From field matches a malicious indicator                |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Malicious_reply_to`       | Reply-to field matches a malicious indicator            |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Malicious_subject`        | Subject matches a malicious indicator                   |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Malicious_rcptto`         | Rcptto field matches a malicious indicator              |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Malicious_Path`           | Relay path matches a malicious indicator                |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Malicious_Decoded_Subject`| Decoded subject matches a malicious indicator           |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::Malicious_URL`             | URL matches a malicious indicator                       |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::FileDownload`             | Phishing URL click resulted in a file download          |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTP::SensitivePOST`               | HTTP POST containing potential credentials              |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTP::SensitivePasswd`             | Credential POST matching site domain and complexity     |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::TargetedSubject`          | Subject seen targeting specific users                   |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::bcc_HighVolumeSubject`    | High volume of BCC recipients for a subject             |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::SubjectMassMail`          | Subject associated with mass mailing                    |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::InternalBCCSender`        | Internal sender using high volume of BCC                |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::InternalMassMail`         | Internal sender performing mass mailing                 |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::ExternalBCCSender`        | External sender using high volume of BCC                |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::ExternalMassMail`         | External sender performing mass mailing                 |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::ManyMsgOrigins`           | Message originating from many different sources         |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::SMTP_Invalid_rcptto`      | Invalid recipient detected                              |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::URLClick`                 | URL from email was clicked in HTTP traffic              |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::RareURLClick`             | Rarely seen URL from email was clicked                  |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::HistoricallyNewAttacker`  | Historically new attacker detected                      |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::AddressSpoofer`           | Sender address spoofing detected                        |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::NameSpoofer`              | Sender name spoofing detected                           |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::HTTPSensitivePOST`        | Sensitive POST detected on tracked phishing destination |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `SMTPurl::MsgBody`                  | Suspicious text with "click here" found in email body   |
+-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+

Logs
----

This package produces the following log files:

* `smtpurl_links.log`: Contains all URLs extracted from email bodies. Fields include ts, uid, id (conn_id), host, and url.
* `smtp_clicked_urls.log`: Records instances where an extracted URL was later accessed via HTTP. Fields include ts, uid, id, host, url, mail_ts, mail_uid, from, to, subject, and referrer.

Feed File Format
----------------

The malicious indicator feed is a tab-separated file with two primary fields: `indicator` and `description`. A sample feed file is located at `scripts/feeds/smtp_malicious_indicators.out`.

Example format:

.. code-block:: text

    #fields indicator	description
    badsender@example.com	Known phishing sender
    f402e0713127617bda852609b426caff	Malicious attachment hash
    HelpDesk	Suspicious subject line

License
-------

This package is licensed under the BSD 3-Clause License.

Copyright (c) Aashish Sharma and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.

Version: 3.0
Tags: smtp, phish, urls, emails
Author: Aashish Sharma
